Upcoming blog post on filtering behaviour (#177)
vespa-engine/blog: _posts/2022-05-09-constrained-approximate-nearest-neighbor-search.md

as another constraint for the approximate `nearestNeighbor` query operator. 

<img src="/assets/2022-05-09-constrained-approximate-nearest-neighbor-search/ann-versus-pre-versus-post.png"/>
<em>**Figure 3** summarizes the strategies used for approximate nearest neighbor search with filtering. 
In the case of *post-filtering*, only one hit is exposed to the ranking phase after the post-filter is
evaluated. In the the case of *pre-filtering*, two additional hits were exposed, but they 
are more distant neighbors. 
</em>

### Filtering strategies and serving performance
From a performance and serving cost perspective, one can on a high level summarize the filtering strategies:

* Pure approximate nearest neighbor search without filters is the cheapest.  
* *Post-filtering* is less resource-intensive than pre-filtering for the same number of `targetHits`. 
* *Pre-filtering* uses more resources than *post-filtering* as it needs to execute the 
filter and then search the `HNSW` graph, constrained by the document ID list produced by the pre-filter execution. 

<img src="/assets/2022-05-09-constrained-approximate-nearest-neighbor-search/pre-filter-approximate-threshold.png"/>

> <em>**Figure 4** With the pre-filtering strategy, searching the `HNSW` graph with a restrictive pre-filter 

Reviewer: the image caption is very long, consider moving some to regular text

Author: Thanks

estimated to match more than 75% of the documents. 
Moderate filters (between 5% and 75%) are evaluated using *pre-filtering* 
and restrictive filters (&lt; 5%) are evaluated using exact search.  

## Summary
Constraining search for nearest neighbors using query-time constraints is mission-critical for 
real-world applications using AI-powered vector representations. By introducing these new native parameters for controlling vector search filtering behavior,  
Vespa further fortifies its position in the industry as the leading open-source serving technology for vector search applications. 

To try out these parameters in practice, see the [practical nearest neighbor search guide](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/nearest-neighbor-search-guide.html) and
especially the section on 
[controlling filter behavior](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/nearest-neighbor-search-guide.html#controlling-filter-behavior). 

See also [Vespa sample applications](https://github.com/vespa-engine/sample-apps) built using Vespa's approximate 
nearest neighbor search:

- [State-of-the-art text ranking](https://github.com/vespa-engine/sample-apps/blob/master/msmarco-ranking/passage-ranking.md) 

> Demonstrating using vector search with AI-powered representations built on NLP Transformer models for candidate retrieval. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vector search with AI-powered representations built on NLP Transformer models for candidate retrieval. 
```

> The application also demonstrates multi-vector representations for re-ranking, using Vespa's [phased retrieval and ranking](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/phased-ranking.html) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application has multi-vector representations for re-ranking, using Vespa's [phased retrieval and ranking](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/phased-ranking.html) 
```

> serving pipelines. Furthermore, the application demonstrates how embedding models, which maps the text data to vector representation, can be 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
serving pipelines. Furthermore, the application shows how embedding models, which maps the text data to vector representation, can be 
```

deployed to Vespa for [run-time inference](https://blog.vespa.ai/stateless-model-evaluation/) during both document and query processing.

- [State-of-the-art image search](https://github.com/vespa-engine/sample-apps/tree/master/text-image-search) Using AI-powered multi-modal vector representations
to retrieve images for a text query. 

- [State-of-the art open-domain question answering](https://github.com/vespa-engine/sample-apps/tree/master/dense-passage-retrieval-with-ann) Using AI-powered vector representations

> to retrieve passages from Wikipedia which are fed into a NLP reader model which identifies the answer. End-to-end represented using Vespa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to retrieve passages from Wikipedia, which are fed into a NLP reader model which identifies the answer. End-to-end represented using Vespa.
```

In addition, the retrieved neighbors for a restrictive filter might be somewhat distant neighbors 
than the *nearest* neighbor of the query embedding. 
Distant neighbors could be combated by specifying a
[distance threshold](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/reference/query-language-reference.html#distancethreshold) 
as another constraint for the approximate `nearestNeighbor` query operator. 

<img src="/assets/2022-05-09-constrained-approximate-nearest-neighbor-search/ann-versus-pre-versus-post.png"/>
<em>**Figure 3** summarizes the strategies used for approximate nearest neighbor search with filtering. 
In the case of *post-filtering*, only one hit is exposed to the ranking phase after the post-filter is
evaluated. In the the case of *pre-filtering*, two additional hits were exposed, but they 
are more distant neighbors. 
</em>

### Filtering strategies and serving performance
From a performance and serving cost perspective, one can on a high level summarize the filtering strategies:

* Pure approximate nearest neighbor search without filters is the cheapest.  
* *Post-filtering* is less resource-intensive than pre-filtering for the same number of `targetHits`. 

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> *Pre-filtering* uses more resources than *post-filtering* as it needs to execute the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* *Pre-filtering* uses more resources than *post-filtering* as it needs to execute the 
```

filter and then search the `HNSW` graph, constrained by the document ID list produced by the pre-filter execution. 

<img src="/assets/2022-05-09-constrained-approximate-nearest-neighbor-search/pre-filter-approximate-threshold.png"/>
<em>**Figure 4** With the pre-filtering strategy, searching the `HNSW` graph with a restrictive pre-filter 
result (few hits) causes the greedy graph search to traverse many nodes before finding the `targetHits` 
which satisfies the document ID list from the pre-filter execution.  
Due to this, there is a sweet spot or threshold where an exact search with filters
has a lower computational cost than an approximate search using the document ID list from the pre-filter execution. 
The actual threshold value depends on vector dimensionality, `HNSW` graph properties, 
and the number of vectors indexed in the Vespa instance. 
</em>

## Controlling the filtering behavior with approximate nearest neighbor search 

> Vespa exposes two parameters that control the query time filtering strategy. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Vespa exposes two parameters that control the query-time filtering strategy. 
```

These parameters give the developer flexibility in choosing a method that fits 
the application use case while hedging performance and resource cost. 

The schema [rank-profile](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/reference/schema-reference.html#rank-profile) parameters are: 

* **post-filter-threshold** - default 1.0 
* **approximate-threshold** - default 0.05

These parameters were introduced in Vespa 7.580.54, 
and can be configured in the [rank profile](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/reference/schema-reference.html#rank-profile), 
defined in the schema, or set using the [query API](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/reference/query-api-reference.html) on
a per-query request basis. The query api parameters are:

* **ranking.matching.postFilterThreshold** - default 1.0 
* **ranking.matching.approximateThreshold** - default 0.05

> <img src="/assets/2022-05-09-constrained-approximate-nearest-neighbor-search/flowchart-small.png"/>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<img src="/assets/2022-05-09-constrained-approximate-nearest-neighbor-search/flowchart.png"/>
```

  approximate-threshold: 0.05
}
</pre>

### Post-filtering with exact search fallback
The following example uses *post-filtering* as a rule and *pre-filtering* is effectively disabled. 
This strategy will always search the `HNSW` graph unconstrained, unless the `estimated-hit-ratio` 
is less than 5%. Falling back to the exact search for estimated restrictive filters could be 
considered a way to improve functionality as exact search will guarantee to expose `targetHits` to ranking
as long as the filter matches more than one document. 

<pre>
rank-profile post-filtering-with-fallback {
  post-filter-threshold: 0.0
  approximate-threshold: 0.05
}
</pre>

### Hybrid - Allow Vespa to chose between pre and post-filtering
The previous examples set extreme values for *post-filter-threshold*, either disabling or enabling it. 

The following combination allows Vespa to choose the strategy 
dynamically based on the `estimated-hit-ratio` estimate.  

<pre>
rank-profile hybrid-filtering {
    post-filter-threshold: 0.75
    approximate-threshold: 0.05
}
</pre>
This parameter combination will trigger *post-filtering* for relaxed filters, 
estimated to match more than 75% of the documents. 

> Moderate filters (between 5% and 75%) are evaluated using `pre-filtering` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moderate filters (between 5% and 75%) are evaluated using *pre-filtering* 
```

and restrictive filters (&lt; 5%) are evaluated using exact search.  

## Summary

> Constraining search for nearest neighbors using query time constraints is mission-critical for 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Constraining search for nearest neighbors using query-time constraints is mission-critical for 
```

real-world applications using AI-powered vector representations. By introducing these new native parameters for controlling vector search filtering behavior,  
Vespa further fortifies its position in the industry as the leading open-source serving technology for vector search applications. 

To try out these parameters in practice, see the [practical nearest neighbor search guide](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/nearest-neighbor-search-guide.html) and
especially the section on 
[controlling filter behavior](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/nearest-neighbor-search-guide.html#controlling-filter-behavior). 

See also [Vespa sample applications](https://github.com/vespa-engine/sample-apps) built using Vespa's approximate 

> nearest neighbor search support to build:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nearest neighbor search:
```

- [State-of-the-art text ranking](https://github.com/vespa-engine/sample-apps/blob/master/msmarco-ranking/passage-ranking.md) 
Demonstrating using vector search with AI-powered representations built on NLP Transformer models for candidate retrieval. 
The application also demonstrates multi-vector representations for re-ranking, using Vespa's [phased retrieval and ranking](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/phased-ranking.html) 

> serving pipelines. Furthermore, the app demonstrates how embedding models, which maps the text data to vector representation, can be 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
serving pipelines. Furthermore, the application demonstrates how embedding models, which maps the text data to vector representation, can be 
```

deployed to Vespa for [run-time inference](https://blog.vespa.ai/stateless-model-evaluation/) during both document and query processing.

- [State-of-the-art image search](https://github.com/vespa-engine/sample-apps/tree/master/text-image-search) Using AI-powered multi-modal vector representations
to retrieve images for a text query. 

- [State-of-the art open-domain question answering](https://github.com/vespa-engine/sample-apps/tree/master/dense-passage-retrieval-with-ann) Using AI-powered vector representations

> to retrieve passages from Wikipedia which are feed into a NLP reader model which identifies the answer. End-to-end represented using Vespa.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to retrieve passages from Wikipedia which are fed into a NLP reader model which identifies the answer. End-to-end represented using Vespa.
```

All these are examples of applications built using AI-powered vector representations, and where real-world deployments 

> need query time constrained nearest neighbor search. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
need query-time constrained nearest neighbor search. 
```
